Circular No. 19. 	S.P.I.8.

United States Department of Agriculture,
DIVISION OF BOTANY.


------------------------------------------------------------------------


*HOP CULTIVATION IN BOHEMIA.*



Saaz and Auscha, the two most noted hop-growing districts of Bohemia,
are rivals in the production of a hop which is not surpassed by any
other in the world, and is equalled in aroma and fine bitter flavor only
by the finest "Golding" hop of Kent, England. Each region claims
priority as to being the one in which the hop plant was first
cultivated, back in almost prehistoric times. The market prices prove
the superiority, in the buyer's mind, of the hops grown in Saaz over
those of Auscha, although this is attributed to a historical, rather
than an actual superiority, by the Auscha growers, who contend that the
Auscha hop to-day is as good as the Saaz hop.



CLIMATIC CONDITIONS.



The town of Saaz lies about 50 miles south of Dresden, in a picturesque
and historically interesting region on the railway between Prag and
Komotau, at an altitude of 600 feet above the sea. Owing to its mild
climate, Saaz was noted in former times for its extensive vineyards. The
mean winter temperature, according to Braungart, the author of an
article^[1]  from which many points on climate and soil
conditions are here taken, is only 28° to 32° F., while in summer it is
64° to 68°. Spring and autumn temperatures vary between 46° and 50°. In
1898, an average crop year, the records of the Saaz Agricultural School,
as tabulated by Mr. English, show an absolute minimum temperature in
December of only 16° F., and a maximum in August of 88° F. The rainfall
in winter amounts to from 1.95 to 3.90 inches; in spring from 3.90 to
5.85; in summer from 5.85 to 7.80; and in autumn from 1.95 to 3.90
inches. The annual total since 1891 has not exceeded 23 inches, and the
rainiest months are April and May. According to Braungart, Saaz has the
smallest rainfall of Bohemia, and possibly of all middle Europe. Rapid
changes of temperature, which are prejudicial to hop culture, are also
infrequent in this region.



EFFECT OF SOIL ON QUALITY OF PRODUCT.



Although the climatic conditions of Saaz play an important role in the
production of a fine hop, the soil conditions are even more important.
In fact, the growers and buyers are so convinced of this influence of
the soil upon the quality of the product, that they have divided the
region about Saaz into three zones, and the hops are graded as first,
second, or third quality, according to the zone in which they were
grown. The grades are known as: I, /Saaz Stadt/ (city); II, /Saaz
Bezirk/ (district); and III, /Saaz Kreis/ (county).



PROTECTING BUYERS.



To regulate the grading and to insure the buyer that the hops he orders
are of the quality he desires, coming from the particular zone he has
stipulated, a stamping house has been erected by the Hop Growers Society
of the city. The aim of this society is to maintain the high reputation
of the Saaz hop and insure by an official stamp or seal placed upon
every package examined by its officers that the contents were produced
in one of the zones above described. There are 480 registered members of
this society, each of whom furnishes an accurate account of the number
of poles of hops he has grown during the season. With these data at hand
it is an easy matter to ascertain if a grower has sold more hops than he
has grown, or, in other words, has imported hops from another region and
sold them as Saaz hops.



STEAM DRYING ROOMS.



This society has been in existence for 66 years and has lately built a
new hall and steam drying house, which is one of the first in the
region.^[2]  The evaporator has a capacity of 1,300 to
1,400 pounds per seven hours, and the charge to growers is $1.60 for
drying 68 bushels of green hops (120 pounds of cured hops). The officer
in charge, Mr. Karl Müller, states that with this steam-heating
apparatus the hops can be dried at a temperature higher than that which
is considered the limit in ordinary drying houses, viz, 89.6° F., the
process thus being shortened and a greener color preserved, which is
more to the fancy of European buyers, although not necessarily
indicative of superior quality.



WHERE THE BEST HOPS ARE GROWN.



The best hops are produced upon a peculiar red clay loam, called the
/Rothliegende/, which lies along a small stream, the Goldbach, the
waters of which are colored by the soil a warm, yellowish red. The
stream overflows its banks every ten years or oftener, doing
considerable damage, but leaving a deposit of rich sediment on the
overflowed fields. Two-thirds of the Saaz hops are grown along this
stream. This soil along the Goldbach is a fine, deep, rich clay, with
great water-holding capacity, poor in magnesium salts, lime, and
chlorides, and containing considerable quantities of iron oxide.
Geologically, it is formed by the disintegration of the so-called
"/Rothliegenden/," or lower Permian formation, and is made up of
broken-down red sandstone, which is composed of quartz, mica, and
feldspar fragments. This soil is universally admitted to be the most
important factor in the production of the characteristic Saaz hop.

The distinguishing features of the Saaz hop are very compact closed
scales, a silky texture, abundance of fats and resins; a large amount of
"lupulin," a high polish, and, when properly dried, a bright
greenish-yellow color. Hops grown on this red soil do not break to
pieces so readily as those grown elsewhere, and therefore the lupulin
does not fall out so easily during packing and shipping.

The value of hop soils about Saaz varies considerably, the best being
valued at more than a thousand dollars per hectare (2.47 acres). The
range is from $240 to $560 an acre. The most valuable locations are
valleys and hillsides sheltered from the prevailing winds, which latter
whip the plants and injure them seriously.



METHODS OF TRAINING THE VINES.



Two distinct systems of culture are in practice in Bohemia. The plants
are trained to poles, or upon wires. In both cases the plants are grown
in rows, 40 inches apart each way. In the old or pole system a pine pole
20 feet high is set in the ground beside each plant, and two vines are
trained upon it, being held in position by straw wisps or bits of twine,
which are renewed during the season as they rot or are torn away. The
newer method, or wire system, while costing more to inaugurate, is less
expensive to maintain, gives more room for cultivation between the rows,
and allows a freer circulation of air through the garden. Hop diseases
are reputed to be less prevalent in such gardens. An overhead system of
wires, running lengthwise of the rows, is supported by firmly planted
posts about the size of telegraph poles. These latter are properly guyed
by strong wires, and those at the border of the field are tilted
outward, at an angle of 20 degrees from the perpendicular, to resist the
strain brought upon them by the long, tightly strung wire. Numerous
cross wires, tightened by twists, keep this overhead network taut, at a
distance of 20 feet from the ground. Strong hemp twine supports are
suspended from these overhead wires by means of simple hooks of bent
wire, or are tied to the wires by an ingenious machine fastened to the
end of a pole. In the former case one end of a twine is first attached
to a hook, and the latter is then caught on the end of a long pole and
hooked over the wire at the desired place, immediately above the plant
for which the twine is to serve as support. The lower end of the twine
is fastened to a short stake driven into the ground by the side of the
plant. No binders are required to fasten the plant to these twine
supports. The cost, during the summer, of caring for a garden on the
wire system is considered 20 per cent less than that of caring for one
with poles



WHEN AND HOW CUTTINGS ARE PLANTED.



The cuttings are planted in April at the bottom of holes dug with a
mattock, being placed in pairs close together with their upper ends 7
inches below the surface of the soil. As the cuttings grow the holes are
gradually filled up with earth until level with the ground. Although old
hop plants admittedly produce a superior quality of hop, they bear
scantily, and it has been found that seven years is the limit of
profitable cultivation, both from the standpoint of the plants and in
order to allow a suitable rotation with lucern (alfalfa), the favorite
green manure. Great stress is laid upon the pruning in the spring, care
being taken that the last year's stems are cut back to the old stock,
and only two or three new shoots allowed to grow.^[3]  The
hop gardens are models of clean culture, scarcely a weed being seen
anywhere, and every square inch of soil is utilized. Farmyard manure is
the only fertilizer used to any extent, although potash and phosphoric
acid fertilizers are being introduced.



ONLY FEMALE PLANTS CULTIVATED.



As the hop of commerce is the seedless flower cluster of the female
plant, quite naturally only plants of this sex are cultivated in the
gardens, although male plants are sometimes seen in cultivated fields.
The greatest pains are taken to immediately root out any of the chance
male plants which have come up from seed or have otherwise gotten into
the garden. In Auscha there are old laws which enforce their immediate
removal. Such male plants are called wild hops and are most abundant in
waste places about the gardens. A single male plant in a garden will
fertilize enough females to materially injure the whole harvest by the
formation of a high percentage of seed in the otherwise seedless
flowers. When the number of hops with seeds reaches more than two-tenths
of one per cent they are rated in Bohemia as of second grade quality. I
was told in Saaz that English and American hops contain quantities of
seed even as high as 6 and 7 per cent. The effect of the seeds in the
brewing process is not known to me; the idea, however, as expressed by
Bohemian hop growers, is that they give a peculiar flavor to the beer,
which is more objectionable to the Continental beer drinkers than to the
English.



THE AUSCHA RED HOPS..



In Saaz there are very few varieties of hops cultivated, the Auscha Red
hop being almost universally grown. The preference is given to this
variety because of its great productiveness, although it is exceeded by
the old Saaz variety in fineness of aroma and bitter flavor.

It is an interesting fact that every year thousands of cuttings of this
Auscha Red hop are imported into Saaz. Two-thirds of the hops cultivated
are from these imported cuttings, and the yield from them as compared
with that from home-grown cuttings is as 13 to 7, and sometimes quite
double. The average production from this variety is 110 pounds per 420
plants, but sometimes 240 plants produce a centner (110 pounds). The
claim is made that the first and second years after their introduction
into Saaz, the plants grown from Auscha cuttings do not produce a hop
that is equal to that from the old Saaz plants, but that, gradually,
they become ameliorated by growth in the wonderful Saaz soil, and later
yield a product quite up to the standard. The bearing capacity gradually
decreases, however, and it is considered necessary with every new
planting to import afresh the Auscha cuttings.

This Auscha Red hop, above referred to is known among Auscha hop growers
as the "/Semsch/" hop, having been found in a garden near Auscha by a
peasant of that name. In recognition of the value of his discovery the
hop growers of Auscha, rather tardily, it must be said, presented his
son, now an old man, with a medal or diploma. No systematic attempts to
breed new varieties of hops seem to have been made in these regions,
notwithstanding this interesting discovery.

This Semsch hop is superior to American varieties as known in Bohemia.
The attempts which have been made to induce the Bohemian brewers to
utilize our much cheaper American hops, have utterly failed. The brewers
declare that American hops are worth less for brewing such beers as they
have a market for. One of the best firms in Auscha informed me that in
rating American hops they would class them on a par with Belgian hops,
which are noted as the worst of all European varieties. On the American
market small quantities of the Semsch hop were sold by this same firm
last year, and brought 58 cents per pound, while American hops were
selling for 19 1/2 cents.

This Semsch variety is worthy a thorough trial in American gardens, and
if a region can be found with soil and climatic conditions similar to
those of Saaz, the Semsch cuttings might produce a grade of hops
rivaling the latter in excellence. The benefits from imported cuttings
in Saaz furnish a striking example of the value of plant introduction,
and of the rejuvenation of a plant culture by growing cuttings from
another region. This principle of introducing from a colder to a warmer
region is well recognized in America, in the case of seeds, but its
application to cuttings has certainly not received the study it
deserves. Neither has the relation of soil and climatic conditions to
the growth of cuttings been determined.



IMPORTATION OF HOP CUTTINGS.



Arrangements have been made for the importation of a considerable number
of cuttings of the Semsch hop for the purpose of testing them under the
various soil and climatic conditions prevailing in the American
hop-growing districts. It would be a happy outcome if they proved as
successful as they have in Saaz. In order to ascertain whether the
Auscha Red hop when transferred to America will retain its native
productiveness, and also to determine if the acquired characters, gained
by cultivating the same variety for years in Saaz, will be retained, a
quantity of cuttings from both places has been ordered for the spring of
1900. In addition, three other varieties are imported for trial, namely,
the Auscha Green hop, Auscha Late hop, both good second grade varieties,
and the true Saaz hop, from plants cultivated for a great many
generations in Saaz.

According to Professor E. Gross, of the Agricultural College at
Tetschen, Bohemia, the last-named sort, the Saaz Red or Gold hop, is the
best very early variety, but it is said to be delicate and to yield only
moderately. The lupulin content is high (15 per cent or over), and
consequently these hops command a high price.

The Semsch or Auscha Red hop is ready for picking about ten days later
than the Saaz, is more vigorous, and yields more. The lupulin content,
however, is much less, being only 9.13 per cent according to Haberlandt.

David G. Fairchild,
/Agricultural Explorer./

Approved:

J. H. Brigham,
/Acting Secretary of Agricultrue./



Washington, D. C., /October 10, 1899./

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 1. ↑  Braungart, R. Studien ueber die Eigenschaften der
    Saazer Hopf en und ueber die bei ihrer Gestaltung Wirksamen
    Ursachen. Reprint from Erste Allgemeine Brauer-Hopfen Revue, No. 2 ,
    1er Jahrgang, Mai, 1894. Published by Franz V. Günzel in Saaz. Out
    of print, and procurable only by special arrangement with Günzel.
 2. ↑  Andrlik and Hueber, of Prag, planned and constructed
    this drying house or "/Darre/," as it is called, and plans can be
    had of them.
 3. ↑  It is worth remarking that a very palatable salad
    called hop salad is made in Saaz from the very young blanched shoots
    of the hop before they are more than an eighth of an inch in
    diameter. The shoots are pulled off the stock, boiled in water, and
    served with a French dressing of salt, pepper, and vinegar.